Nothing beats a new piano and Piano Price Point is dedicated to delivering the news about the makers of new pianos. But sometimes they are simply unaffordable, inaccessible or possibly even discontinued and so it necessitates buying used. But that begs the question, how old is too old? At what point do pianos no longer function the way they were originally intended?

In my lifetime I’ve viewed and played several thousand pianos and as I pondered this question, it made me think about what changes occur in the lifetime of a piano. More specifically, how and why do pianos alter over time and what causes them to sometimes dramatically shift?  There are 3 possible answers to this question: how much the instrument is played; the environment it is kept in; and decomposition over time.

For example, a performer working on their Masters level piano degree, practicing 2 – 6 hours per day of concert level material, will use a piano very differently to a beginner student who gently touches the keys a few times per week. In a decade, the advanced performer’s piano will become substantially worn.  So, it is safe to say that for pianos in an area of high use, wear and tear of the instrument is accelerated.

I’ve also witnessed pianos that have been housed in adverse environments. I remember this one piano that was covered in what I could only be describe as cooking grease. Repetitive use of cooking oil in close quarters with the piano caused adverse effects on the instrument. The outside of the piano looked almost fogged, its shiny black finish reduced to a dull matt. More than that, however, the parts inside were also coated and rendered the action sticky. I’ve seen pianos that have been in fire, floods and ones that have been infested with bugs. While these are extreme environmental conditions, there are also varying degrees of subtle ‘life altering’ conditions that will, day after day, year after year change a piano. Things such as exposure to the beating hot sun, or widely fluctuating temperatures and humidity can affect the tone, performance and even cabinet of a piano. I would then categorize environment as a substantial factor in piano aging.
https://pianopricepoint.com/how-old-is-too-old/
